# Homework 6

## Due Date: Sunday November 15, 2020 (23h59)

- This homework is to be done individually. You may discuss problems
with fellow students, but all submitted work must be entirely your
own, and should not be from any other course, present, past, or
future. If you use a solution from another source you must cite it
&mdash; this includes when that source is someone else helping
you.

- **Please do not post your solutions on a
public website or a public repository like GitHub.**

- All programming is to be done in OCaml v4.

- Code your answers by modifying the file
[`homework6.ml`](homework6.ml) provided. Add your **name**, your
**email address**, and any **remarks** that you wish to make to the
instructor to the block comment at the head of the file.

- **Please do not change the types in the signature of the
function stubs I provide**. Doing so will make it
impossible to load your code into the testing infrastructure,
and make me unhappy.

- Feel free to define helper functions if you need them.


## Electronic Submission Instructions

- Start a _fresh_  OCaml shell.

- Load your homework code via `#use "homework6.ml";;` to make sure that there will be no errors when I load your code.

- If there are any error, do not submit. I can't test what I can't `#use`.

- When you're ready to submit, send an email with your file
`homework6.ml` as an attachment to `olin.submissions@gmail.com` with
subject _Homework 6 submission_.


* * *


Here is a type for production grammars:

    type symbol = string
    
    type grammar = {
      nonterms: symbol list;
      terms: symbol list;
      rules: (string * string) list;
      start : symbol
    }
    
Recall that a grammar is described by a set of nonterminal symbols, a
set of terminal symbols, a set of rules, and a starting symbol. The
following grammar with starting symbol S and terminals `a` and `b`
generates the language {`a`<sup>n</sup>`b`<sup>n</sup> | n &ge; 0}:

   S &#x2192; &epsilon;<br>
   S &#x2192; `a` S `b` 

Here is how you represent that grammar with the type above:

    let anbn = {
      nonterms = ["S"];
      terms = ["a"; "b"];
      rules = [("S", "");
               ("S", "aSb")];
      start = "S"
    }
    
Note that a rule P &#x2192; Q is represented by a pair (P,Q)
where P and Q are strings containing terminal and nonterminal
symbols.

Here is a grammar generating the language {`a`<sup>n</sup>`b`<sup>m</sup> | m &ge; n &ge; 0}:

    let anbm = {
      nonterms = ["S"; "T"; "U"];
      terms = ["a"; "b"];
      rules = [ ("S", "TU");
                ("T", "");
                ("T", "aTb");
                ("U", "");
                ("U", "Ub")];
      start = "S"
    }

To check whether a string can be generated from a grammar, I
provided you with a function

    generate: grammar -> string -> int -> string list -> bool

Essentially, `generate gr str n init` checks whether string `str`
can be generated by grammar `gr`, returning true if it can, and false otherwise. If
true, the function also prints a sequence of rewrites that shows how
the string can be generated. For example:

    # generate anbm "aabbb" 10 [];;
    Searching (depth 01, max width 1)
    Searching (depth 02, max width 2)
    Searching (depth 03, max width 3)
    Searching (depth 04, max width 4)
    Searching (depth 05, max width 5)
    Searching (depth 06, max width 6)
       S
    -> TB
    -> aTbB
    -> aaTbbB
    -> aabbB
    -> aabbBb
    -> aabbb
    - : bool = true

What about arguments `n` and `init`? Well, checking if a string
can be generated by a grammar is done by taking the start symbol,
and repeatedly applying all possible rules until the string is
generated. That's expensive. Also, if the string cannot be generated,
then this process never terminates.  To control the process and
prevent searching forever, rules are applied only up
to _depth_ `n` (that is, up to `n` rules can be
applied in any sequence of rewrites &mdash; moreover, the maximum
width of string that can be obtained during any of those rewrites is
also `n`). This means, in particular, that if you know that a
string requires K rewrites to be generated, then you need to supply a
value of at least K to function `generate`. The tricky bit is
that the largest the parameter `n`, the slowest the generation
process, because the tree of rewrites being searched gets bigger
as `n` increases. If your grammar gets too complicated, don't
be surprised if it gets difficult to generate strings you _know_
can be generated.

Here's a sample generation that fails because the search depth
is too low:

    # generate anbm "aaaaabbbbbbb" 10 [];;
    Searching (depth 01, max width 01)
    Searching (depth 02, max width 02)
    Searching (depth 03, max width 03)
    Searching (depth 04, max width 04)
    Searching (depth 05, max width 05)
    Searching (depth 06, max width 06)
    Searching (depth 07, max width 07)
    Searching (depth 08, max width 08)
    Searching (depth 09, max width 09)
    Searching (depth 10, max width 10)
    Searching (depth 11, max width 11)
    - : bool = false
    
Increasing the depth gets us the string:

    # generate anbm "aaaaabbbbbbb" 13 [];;
    Searching (depth 01, max width 01)
    Searching (depth 02, max width 02)
    Searching (depth 03, max width 03)
    Searching (depth 04, max width 04)
    Searching (depth 05, max width 05)
    Searching (depth 06, max width 06)
    Searching (depth 07, max width 07)
    Searching (depth 08, max width 08)
    Searching (depth 09, max width 09)
    Searching (depth 10, max width 10)
    Searching (depth 11, max width 11)
    Searching (depth 12, max width 12)
       S
    -> TU
    -> aTbU
    -> aaTbbU
    -> aaaTbbbU
    -> aaaaTbbbbU
    -> aaaaaTbbbbbU
    -> aaaaabbbbbU
    -> aaaaabbbbbUb
    -> aaaaabbbbbUbb
    -> aaaaabbbbbbb
    - : bool = true

To help, you can also give an initial sequence `init` of rewrites to
get you to a point where you want to start the derivation search. If
you specify `[]`, the search will start from the start symbol, the way
we saw in class. If you specify a sequence of strings, `generate`
checks that the sequence describes an possible sequence of rewrites
(in particular, the first string in the sequence should be the
starting symbol) and then starts the search from the last string in
the sequence, which will be depth 1 for the purpose of this search. If
the sequence of strings does not describe a possible sequence of
rewrites, you will get an exception.

Here is an example of the search above that failed at depth 10 which succeeds at depth 10 if you give the first few rewrites:

    # generate anbm "aaaaabbbbbbb" 10 ["S"; "TU"; "aTbU"; "aaTbbU"];;
    Searching (depth 01, max width 01)
    Searching (depth 02, max width 02)
    Searching (depth 03, max width 03)
    Searching (depth 04, max width 04)
    Searching (depth 05, max width 05)
    Searching (depth 06, max width 06)
    Searching (depth 07, max width 07)
       aaTbbU
    -> aaaTbbbU
    -> aaaaTbbbbU
    -> aaaaaTbbbbbU
    -> aaaaabbbbbU
    -> aaaaabbbbbUb
    -> aaaaabbbbbUbb
    -> aaaaabbbbbbb
    - : bool = true

This is needed, for example, if you want to check that `anbncn` can
generate `aaaaaabbbbbbcccccc` - this requires depth > 38 starting from
the start symbol, and I didn't have the patience to run it to
completion on my machine. It takes a long while. But we can get it
under a minute if we're willing to provide the first few rewrites:

    # generate anbncn "aaaaaabbbbbbcccccc" 35 ["S"; "AB"; "AAB"; "AAAB"; "AAAAB"; "AAAAAB"; "AAAAAAB"; "AAAAAAXbBc"; "AAAAAAXbXbBcc"; "AAAAAAXbXbXbBccc"; "AAAAAAXbXbXbXbBcccc"; "AAAAAAXbXbXbXbXbBccccc"; "AAAAAAXbXbXbXbXbXbBcccccc"; "AAAAAAXbXbXbXbXbXbcccccc"];;
    Searching (depth 01, max width 01)
    Searching (depth 02, max width 02)
    Searching (depth 03, max width 03)
    Searching (depth 04, max width 04)
    Searching (depth 05, max width 05)
    Searching (depth 06, max width 06)
    Searching (depth 07, max width 07)
    Searching (depth 08, max width 08)
    Searching (depth 09, max width 09)
    Searching (depth 10, max width 10)
    Searching (depth 11, max width 11)
    Searching (depth 12, max width 12)
    Searching (depth 13, max width 13)
    Searching (depth 14, max width 14)
    Searching (depth 15, max width 15)
    Searching (depth 16, max width 16)
    Searching (depth 17, max width 17)
    Searching (depth 18, max width 18)
    Searching (depth 19, max width 19)
    Searching (depth 20, max width 20)
    Searching (depth 21, max width 21)
    Searching (depth 22, max width 22)
    Searching (depth 23, max width 23)
    Searching (depth 24, max width 24)
    Searching (depth 25, max width 25)
    Searching (depth 26, max width 26)
    Searching (depth 27, max width 27)
    Searching (depth 28, max width 28)
    Searching (depth 29, max width 29)
    Searching (depth 30, max width 30)
    Searching (depth 31, max width 31)
    Searching (depth 32, max width 32)
    Searching (depth 33, max width 33)
    Searching (depth 34, max width 34)
    Searching (depth 35, max width 35)
       AAAAAAXbXbXbXbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAAAAabXbXbXbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAAAAaXbbXbXbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAAAAXabbXbXbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAAAaabbXbXbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAAAaabXbbXbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAAAaaXbbbXbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAAAaXabbbXbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAAAXaabbbXbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAAaaabbbXbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAAaaabbXbbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAAaaabXbbbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAAaaaXbbbbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAAaaXabbbbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAAaXaabbbbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAAXaaabbbbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAaaaabbbbXbXbcccccc
    -> AAaaaabbbXbbXbcccccc
    -> AAaaaabbXbbbXbcccccc
    -> AAaaaabXbbbbXbcccccc
    -> AAaaaaXbbbbbXbcccccc
    -> AAaaaXabbbbbXbcccccc
    -> AAaaXaabbbbbXbcccccc
    -> AAaXaaabbbbbXbcccccc
    -> AAXaaaabbbbbXbcccccc
    -> AaaaaabbbbbXbcccccc
    -> AaaaaabbbbXbbcccccc
    -> AaaaaabbbXbbbcccccc
    -> AaaaaabbXbbbbcccccc
    -> AaaaaabXbbbbbcccccc
    -> AaaaaaXbbbbbbcccccc
    -> AaaaaXabbbbbbcccccc
    -> AaaaXaabbbbbbcccccc
    -> AaaXaaabbbbbbcccccc
    -> AaXaaaabbbbbbcccccc
    -> AXaaaaabbbbbbcccccc
    -> aaaaaabbbbbbcccccc
    - : bool = true

Note that you can use this to test a complete derivation:

    # generate anbm "aaaaabbbbbbb" 1 ["S"; "TU"; "TUb"; "TUbb"; "Tbb"; "aTbbb"; "aaTbbbb"; "aaaTbbbbb"; "aaaaTbbbbbb"; "aaaaaTbbbbbbb"; "aaaaabbbbbbb"];;
    Searching (depth 01, max width 01)
       aaaaabbbbbbb
    - : bool = true

(You'll need a depth of at least 1 to get the function to recognize your sequence.)


* * *


## Question 1: Context-Free Grammars


In this question,  I ask you to define context-free
grammars as constants using `let` with a fixed name
given below in each question. There is already a placeholder
in `homework6.ml` for those answers. Just replace the
placeholder with your definition.

Note that the grammars in this question should all be context-free.

### (A)

Construct a context-free grammar **`q1_ambncmn`** of type **`grammar`**
that generates the language of all strings of the form
`a`<sup>m</sup>`b`<sup>n</sup>`c`<sup>m+n</sup> for m, n &ge; 0, i.e.,
the set of all strings of `a`s followed by `b`s followed by `c`s,
where there are as many `c`s as `a`s and `b`s combined.

Sample strings in the generated language:

    (the empty string)
    ac
    aacc
    aaaccc
    bc
    bbcc
    bbbccc
    abcc
    aabccc
    aaabcccc
    abbccc
    abbbcccc
    aaabbbcccccc

Sample strings _not_ in the generated language:

    cb
    ba
    ccba
    a
    b
    c
    ab
    aabb
    aabbc
    abc
    aabcccc
    aabbccc


### (B)

Construct a context-free grammar **`q1_ambmncn`**
of type **`grammar`**
that generates the language of all strings of the form
`a`<sup>m</sup>`b`<sup>m+n</sup>`c`<sup>n</sup> for m, n &ge; 0, i.e., the set of all strings made up
of `a`s followed by `b`s 
followed by `c`s, where there are as many `b`s as `a`s and `c`s combined.

Sample strings in the generated language:

    (the empty string)
    ab
    aabb
    aaabbb
    bc
    bbcc
    bbbccc
    abbc
    aabbbc
    aaabbbbc
    abbbcc
    abbbbccc
    aaabbbbbbccc

Sample strings _not_ in the generated language:

    cb
    ba
    cbba
    a
    b
    c
    ac
    aacc
    aabcc
    abc
    aabbbbc
    aabbbcc
    


### (C)

Construct a context-free grammar **`q1_a2mnbmc2n`** of type
**`grammar`** that generates the language of all strings of the form
`a`<sup>2m+n</sup>`b`<sup> m</sup>`c`<sup>2n</sup> for m, n &ge; 0, i.e.,
the set of all strings made up of `a`s followed by `b`s followed by
`c`s, where there are 2m+n `a`s when there are  m `b`s and 2n `c`s. 

Sample strings in the generated language:

    (the empty string)   [m=0, n=0]
    aaabcc               [m=1, n=1]
    aaaabb               [m=2, n=0]
    aacccc               [m=0, n=2]
    aaaaabbcc            [m=2, n=1]
    aaaabcccc            [m=1, n=2]
    aaaaaabbcccc         [m=2, n=2]
    aaaaaaaabbbcccc      [m=3, n=2]
    aaaaaaabbcccccc      [m=2, n=3]

Sample strings _not_ in the generated language:

    ba
    bc
    ccbaaa
    bccaaa
    aabcc
    aaaabcc
    aaccc
    aaccccc
    aaaabbcc
    aaaaaabbcc


### (D)

Construct a context-free grammar **`q1_eqnum2`**
of type **`grammar`**
that
generates all strings over {`a`,`b`} that have the same number of `a`s and `b`s.

Sample strings in the generated language:

    (the empty string)
    ab
    ba
    aabb
    abab
    baab
    baba
    aaabbb
    ababab
    bbaaba
    abaabbabbaba

Sample strings _not_ in the generated language:

    a
    b
    abb
    aba
    babab
    bbaab
    aaabb
    abababa
    aaaaaab
    abbbbbb
    

* * *


## Question 2: Unrestricted Grammars

In this question, I ask you to define grammars as
constants using `let` with a fixed name given below in each question,
like you did in Question 1. There is already a placeholder in
`homework6.ml` for those answers. Just replace the placeholder with your
definition.

Note that I'm allowing unrestricted grammars. The languages below need
not be context-free, meaning that they may not have context-free
grammars generating them.

Testing these is difficult, depending on the complexity of the
grammars you come up with. To help me on my end, I will ask you not
only to create the grammar, but also to give the sequence of rewrites
that generate a given string. That sequence of rewrites should be of
the form that I can feed into `generate` as described above to test
that your sequence of rewrites correctly generates the string. For
instance, if I were to ask you to give a sequence of rewrites to show
that `anbn` can generate the string `aaaabbbb`, you could give me the
list:

    val test_anbn_4 = ["S"; "aSb"; "aaSbb"; "aaaSbbb"; "aaaaSbbbb"; "aaaabbbb"]

which I will be able to test by running

    generate anbn "aaaabbbb" 1 test_anbn_4

You can define those rewrites as list ocnstants using `let` with fixed
names given below for each grammar.  There is a placeholder for those
rewrite that you should replace with your lists.


### (A)

Construct a grammar **`q2_addition`** of type **`grammar`** that generates the language of all strings of the form `1`<sup>m</sup>`+1`<sup>n</sup>`=1`<sup>m+n</sup> for m, n &ge; 0 representing **unary** addition. For instance, `111+11=11111` represents 3 + 2 = 5, while `11+=11` represent 2 + 0 = 2.

Sample strings in the generated language:

    +=
    1+=1
    +1=1
    1+1=11
    11+1111=111111
    111+11111=11111111
    11111+111=11111111
    1111+=1111

Sample strings _not_ in the generated language:

    1+1=1
    11+=1
    11+=111
    11+11=111
    11+11=11111
    1=1+1
    1+1+1=1
    1=1=1
    
It turns out that this language is context-free, so you _can_ come up
with a context-free grammar for it. But it's fine if your grammar is
unrestricted.

Please provide sequences of rewrites showing how to generate
`111+11111=11111111` and `11111+111=11111111` with your grammar, bound
to the identifiers **`rewrites_q2_addition_3_5`** and
**`rewrites_q2_addition_5_3`**, respectively.

    

### (B) (Challenging)

Construct a grammar **`q2_straddle`** of type **`grammar`**
that generates strings of the form WRW where W is an arbitrary string over alphabet {`a`, `b`} and R is the reverse of W.

Sample strings in the generated language:

    (the empty string)
    aaa
    bbbbbb
    abbaab
    ababaababaababa
    aabbbbaaaabb
    abbbbaabb
    
Sample strings _not_ in the generated language:

    aaaa
    aaaaa
    ababab
    abbbbabba
    ababbabaaba
    aaabbbaaa

Please provide sequences of rewrites showing how to generate
`abaabaaba` and `abbbbbbaabbb` with your grammar, bound
to the identifiers **`rewrites_q2_straddle_aba`** and
**`rewrites_q2_straddle_abbb`**, respectively.

**Hint**: there are many ways of doing this, with varying levels of
complexity. The approach I took -- not necessarily the simplest -- is
to derive an intermediate string of the form `abbb>BBBAYYYX<abbb` and
make `A X` interact to create an `a`, and make `B Y` interact to create a `b`,
in a suitable order. (The same trick that was used in the grammar for {`a`<sup>n</sup>`b`<sup>n</sup>`c`<sup>n</sup> | n &ge; 0} in class, where `X W` interact to create `W c`.)
As usual, one challenge is making sure not
to generate any string that is _not_ of the desired form.

